The mayor of Seattle, Ed Murray, said on Tuesday that he would resign after announcing in May that he would not seek a second term. Several men have come forward to accuse Mr. Murray of sexually abusing them decades ago, when they were underage.The announcement came just hours after The Seattle Times published a story with an account by a fifth man, Mr. Murray’s cousin, who said Mr. Murray had abused him in the 1970s.In a brief statement, Mr. Murray said, as he has many times before, that “the allegations against me are not true.” But he added, “It has also become clear to me that in light of the latest news reports, it is best for the city if I step aside.”Mr. Murray, 62, a Democrat, is the city’s first openly gay mayor, and had served in the State Legislature for many years before being elected in 2013. The City Council president, Bruce Harrell, will become mayor upon Mr. Murray’s resignation, which his office said would be effective Wednesday.An election to replace Mr. Murray permanently is already in full swing, with two candidates — Jenny Durkan, a former United States attorney, and Cary Moon, an urban planner, engineer and local activist — vying to replace him in November.The mayor expressed gratitude to the city and its residents, saying, “it is important that my personal issues do not affect the ability of our city government to conduct the public’s business.”The liberal Mr. Murray is generally considered a father of Washington’s same-sex marriage law, which he pressed in the State Legislature for years. As mayor, he pushed into law one of the nation’s first big-city, $15-an-hour minimum-wage laws.His fall could continue to resonate in the mayor’s race even after his departure. He has endorsed Ms. Durkan as his successor, and during the primary campaign she, along with a majority of the City Council, stopped short of saying he should step aside before his term was out. Ms. Moon, by contrast, called for him to resign four months ago. But after the report of a fifth complainant on Tuesday, Ms. Durkan, who is openly lesbian, said the time had come.“I previously urged the mayor to reflect deeply about whether he could continue to lead and what was in the best interests of the city,” Ms. Durkan said in a statement. “As a parent, former public official and openly gay woman these allegations are beyond sad and tragic; no official is above the law.”Ms. Moon, in a statement, thanked Mr. Murray for “finally stepping up and doing the right thing.”“A mayor’s job is to act with integrity and to ensure that every Seattleite feels respected and safe,” Ms. Moon added. “We have to live the values we claim to hold, and whoever is in the mayor’s office must lead by example.”
