Irene B. Rosenfeld, the chief executive of the food giant Mondelez International, will depart after an 11-year tenure punctuated by battles with activist investors, stagnant sales growth and the changing demands of increasingly health-conscious snackers.Mondelez, the maker of Oreo cookies and Ritz crackers, said on Wednesday that it had chosen the chief executive of the frozen food company McCain Foods, Dirk Van de Put, to succeed Ms. Rosenfeld in November.The change in leadership comes as big snack food makers struggle to adapt to more selective consumer tastes. Americans buy billions of dollars in chips, cookies and other treats every year, but are increasingly eschewing ingredients perceived as artificial. Seeking to tap the growing appetite for unconventional ingredients, Mondelez introduced its first new product in years — Good Thins crackers, made with powdered sweet potatoes and chickpeas — last year.Mondelez’s revenue in its most recent quarter was down 5 percent from the same period a year earlier, to nearly $6 billion, and its share price is down 2.3 percent so far this year.Ms. Rosenfeld, one of the few female top executives in corporate America, led Mondelez through some of its biggest transitions, including a split from Kraft Foods in 2012. Her departure leaves fewer than 30 women at the helm of companies listed on the Standard & Poor’s 500, according to data collected by Catalyst, a research firm that studies women in business.Kraft named Ms. Rosenfeld its chief executive in 2006, ousting Roger K. Deromedi, who had spent nearly three decades at the company. It was a return to Kraft for Ms. Rosenfeld; she had spent 20 years at the company before joining Frito-Lay, PepsiCo’s snack division, in 2004.In 2007, she led Kraft through its split from the cigarette giant Altria Group. Three years later, she oversaw the acquisition of the chocolate company Cadbury — a move that drew an unusual rebuke from Warren E. Buffett, one of Kraft’s largest shareholders at the time, who called the deal “dumb.” (Mr. Buffett later said he supported the deal, which made Kraft’s snack business big enough to stand alone and compete against its rivals.)In 2012, Ms. Rosenfeld spun off brands including Velveeta, Kraft macaroni & cheese and Oscar Mayer, effectively allowing investors to choose between betting on the fast-growing snack business or a grocery operation that churned out a predictable cash flow. The remaining company was renamed Mondelez.But consumer tastes have changed in the last five years. They still want tasty snacks, just not the unpronounceable ingredients that are often required to give packaged goods the right texture or flavor. Meeting that demand has been a challenge for the entire industry, which has recently seen executive shake-ups and consolidation among several food and beverage titans.In 2015, for instance, Kraft Foods merged with Heinz, a major bet on the types of processed foods that are losing ground.Last year, Mondelez attempted to buy the chocolate maker Hershey Company, but dropped those efforts in the summer after its $23 billion offer was rebuffed.Mondelez has also been facing mounting pressure from two of its activist shareholders, Nelson Peltz and William A. Ackman.Mr. Peltz, who joined Mondelez’s board in 2014, has been a particularly vocal agitator. Complaining about “slow growth” in PepsiCo’s beverage unit, Mr. Peltz had, at one point, pushed for a merger with Mondelez and an eventual spinoff of the beverage division — a plan that he ultimately dropped.Through a spokeswoman, Mr. Peltz said that he was “pleased” with the appointment of Mr. Van de Put, and praised Ms. Rosenfeld’s leadership, citing the growth in the company’s share price since she joined in 2006. Mondelez shares gained 1.1 percent on Wednesday, to $44.10.“Her leadership has benefited all of the company’s stakeholders,” Mr. Peltz said.A spokesman for Mr. Ackman’s hedge fund, Pershing Square Capital Management, declined to comment.Mr. Van de Put will also join the company’s board of directors. Ms. Rosenfeld will continue in her role as chairwoman of the board until March, when Mr. Van de Put will take over the leadership post.Mondelez declined to make Mr. Van de Put available for an interview.Mr. Van de Put spent six years as the head of McCain, one of the world’s largest makers of frozen potato products, a period the company said generated record growth. McCain, a privately held company based in Canada, generates over $9 billion in annual sales, according to its website.In a statement, McCain said that its chief financial officer, Max Koeune, would succeed Mr. Van de Put. A spokesman for the company declined to comment further.Before arriving at McCain, Mr. Van de Put served in executive roles at the drugmaker Novartis, the candy maker Mars and the Coca-Cola Company.“He is a seasoned global C.E.O., having lived and worked on three different continents, with deep experience and expertise in all critical business and commercial operations in both emerging and developed markets,” Ms. Rosenfeld said in the announcement.
