The director Steven Soderbergh summed it up in a tweet on Thursday night, calling the latest episode of the FX show “Atlanta” “the most beautifully photographed half hour of TV I’ve ever seen. In addition to being COMPLETELY BANANAS.”Another bottle episode in a show made up almost entirely of narrative detours, the sixth chapter of the show’s second season, titled “Teddy Perkins,” was written by Donald Glover, the show’s creator and star, and directed by its visual mastermind, Hiro Murai. It centers on Darius (Lakeith Stanfield), who had thus far been mostly relegated to eccentric-sidekick status, as he rents a U-Haul to pick up what we come to learn is a free piano (with multicolored keys) from a dimly lit Southern mansion.A horror movie in miniature, eerie and tense throughout, “Teddy Perkins” reveals itself slowly as a musing on generational trauma and artistic genius, heavy on allusions — and eventually, explicit references — to Michael Jackson. But while the King of Pop is most fully embodied through the character of Theodore Perkins, Darius’s diminutive and creepy host, whose bleached skin and distinctively molded face could be a nod to no one else, Jackson is far from the only cultural touchstone driving the episode to its violent conclusion.Below is a (surely incomplete) list of the other Easter eggs, obvious and not, scattered throughout the episode.For a show — and episode — about music, “Teddy Perkins” is most effective, tonally, with silence. But the episode is book ended by two songs, both from Stevie Wonder, beginning with “Sweet Little Girl,” the side-one closer from his 1972 album “Music of My Mind.”Upon arriving at Perkins’s mansion, Darius initially bonds with his bizarre host over their shared love of the album. But later, after all variety of increasingly menacing behavior by Perkins, he and Darius disagree about the source of the music’s spiritual might. Debating the necessity of the abuse Perkins and his brother, the ailing pianist Benny Hope, suffered at the hands of their hard-driving father, Perkins says: “Stevie had his own sacrifices. He was blind.” Darius counters: “Yeah, but he wasn’t blinded. He saw through his music,” to which Perkins says: “That’s beautiful. But wrong.”As the scene turns bloody, “Music of My Mind” returns in the form of the side-two closer, “Evil,” with Mr. Wonder singing, “Evil, why have you engulfed so many hearts/evil/evil, why have you destroyed so many minds.”Also name-dropped in the episode are these titans of black music, who serve to cement the bona fides of Benny Hope, the fictional charge and onetime virtuoso who looms over the entirety of “Teddy Perkins.” Allegedly friends and collaborators of Hope and his brother, these stars of jazz and R&B are referenced or seen in vintage photographs, including one that seems to have been altered from an actual photo of a young Michael Jackson. (Another features Bill Clinton.)In one of the episode’s carefully deployed comic-relief moments, Perkins also plays a voice recording reminding himself to “finish that hat for Dionne Warwick,” bizarre headgear being another recurring motif in the episode. (Earlier, Darius, frustrated by a Confederate flag cap reading “Southern Made,” buys it and uses a red marker to make it read “U Mad.”)In another back and forth about the merits of certain music, Perkins and Darius spar over the validity of rap, with Darius offering that sometimes “people just want to have a good time.” Perkins contends that the genre “never quite grew out of its adolescence,” adding, “Don’t you find it insufficient as an art form?” Darius shoots back: “We got Jay-Z — he’s like 65,” a rare light moment in this episode where it feels O.K. to exhale.When Darius calls his friends to alert them to his peculiar situation — before laying eyes on the reclusive Benny Hope himself — he posits that Perkins and his brother are one in the same. “I think Benny created Teddy to make up for the fact that he made himself look like a ghoul,” he says, before offering a topical example: “He looks like somebody left Sammy Sosa in the dryer.”Since his retirement, Mr. Sosa, the former Chicago Cubs slugger, has become an object of derision online as his skin has appeared lighter and lighter. (Mr. Sosa has said he uses a bleaching cream, but insisted, “I don’t think I look like Michael Jackson.”) After Googling “Sammy Sosa hat” — go ahead, try it — Darius’s friends participate in a mini-roasting session that will ring familiar to anyone who’s read a tweet about Sammy Sosa in recent years.As for Perkins’s own apparent skin-bleaching, many viewers have guessed that the character is played by Donald Glover himself in whiteface — and, despite his Jackson-like high-pitched voice, the vocal patterns do match — although the end credits list, in a final punch line, “Teddy Perkins as himself.”Darius is right to worry that Perkins seems “like he wanna keep me here,” as he relays in his phone call. It also happens that Lakeith Stanfield, who plays Darius, played a similarly captive role in the similarly unsettling, race-oriented horror film “Get Out.” When Perkins snaps a Polaroid of Darius entering the peculiar gift shop he has dedicated to his brother, Darius says, “I’m not a big photo person,” recalling his brainwashed character Logan King in Jordan Peele’s “Get Out.”The stack of books lingering near Darius’s head during a crucial moment was probably not arranged haphazardly, given the attention to visual detail throughout “Atlanta,” and especially this episode. Among a pile that also includes Joseph E. Stiglitz’s “The Great Divide: Unequal Societies and What We Can Do About Them” are a few books by Stuart Woods, a novelist from Georgia who happens to have created a recurring villain named Teddy.In the scene that cracks open this often-befuddling episode, Perkins, who aims to turn he and his brother’s mansion into a museum, shows Darius a faceless mannequin in a suit — a stand-in for the father that drove the siblings to musical greatness. “He wanted the best out of us,” Perkins explains, stating plainly that there would be physical punishment if they failed.“Dad used to beat you to be good at piano?” Darius asks. Perkins responds: “To be good at life,” adding, “To make an omelet, you have to break a few eggs.” (This metaphor is particularly rich given the earlier, ominous scene of Perkins picking at an oozing soft-boiled ostrich egg.) He goes on to say that he wants the museum dedicated not only to his father, but also to Marvin Gaye Sr., Tiger Woods’s father, Serena Williams’s father and “the father who drops Emilio Estevez off in ‘The Breakfast Club.’”While Darius contends later that “not all great things come from great pain — sometimes it’s love,” Perkins has a catchall retort in defense of his own suffering and what it wrought: “Most people wouldn’t understand.”
