WASHINGTON — President Trump said on Thursday that he had not considered firing Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel investigating Russian meddling in the election, contradicting private statements the president has made to his aides and friends about his desire to dismiss Mr. Mueller.Mr. Trump spoke about the special counsel in a wide-ranging briefing with reporters at his golf club in Bedminster, N.J., where he also characterized as tepid his relationship with Attorney General Jeff Sessions (“It’s fine”) and shared his reaction to reports that Mr. Mueller’s investigators searched the home of his former campaign chairman, Paul Manafort (“I thought it was pretty tough stuff to wake him up, perhaps his family was there”).The Justice Department investigation into possible links between Mr. Trump’s associates and Russia’s election interference has engulfed the White House in political and legal scrutiny. The revelation that Mr. Trump asked the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, to end the inquiry into his first national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn, prompted the appointment of Mr. Mueller as a special counsel in May. And the president’s public scoldings of Mr. Sessions in recent weeks have prompted speculation that he is seeking a path to end the investigation.Asked about the possibility of firing Mr. Mueller, the president said on Thursday: “I haven’t given it any thought. Well, I’ve been reading about it from you people. You say, ‘Oh, I’m going to dismiss him.’ No, I’m not dismissing anybody. I mean, I want them to get on with the task.”Mr. Trump added: “We’re working with him. We have a situation that’s very unusual. There was no collusion between us and Russia. In fact, the opposite. Russia spent a lot of money on fighting me” during the campaign.But the statements stood in contrast to what Mr. Trump has privately told people close to him in recent months. The president has discussed both the possibility of firing Mr. Mueller and his concerns that the investigation will undermine his presidency.In June, one of Mr. Trump’s longtime friends, Christopher Ruddy, said in a television interview that Mr. Trump was considering firing Mr. Mueller.In response to reports about the search of Mr. Manafort’s home, Mr. Trump said he “thought it was a very, very strong signal, or whatever” by prosecutors, adding that he was surprised they took such a step because it is something they “very seldom” do.Obtaining and executing a search warrant is considered an aggressive step for authorities, who are required to demonstrate they have probable cause to believe they will find evidence of a crime. Experts said Mr. Mueller might be pressuring Mr. Manafort into cooperating with the inquiry.Investigators sought tax documents and foreign banking records from Mr. Manafort, who is under investigation for his business dealings, his attendance at a meeting between campaign officials and Russians, and whether his work for the Ukrainian government violated the Foreign Agents Registration Act.Mr. Trump said he had not spoken to Mr. Manafort “for a long time” but that he has “always found Paul Manafort to be a very decent man.”“He’s like a lot of other people,” Mr. Trump said. “Probably makes consultant fees from all over the place, who knows, I don’t know, but I thought it was pretty tough stuff to wake him up, perhaps his family was there. I think that’s pretty tough stuff.”Mr. Manafort, whose lawyer had been Reginald J. Brown of the law firm WilmerHale, announced on Thursday that he was rehiring the Miller & Chevalier law firm, a spokesman for Mr. Manafort said in a statement.As for the president’s relationship with Mr. Sessions, whom he described last month as “beleaguered,” Mr. Trump was brief.“It is what it is,” he said. “It’s fine.”
