WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — If you have spent enough time admiring those who twist words and bend them to their punny wills, you have probably stumbled upon the brilliant work of Weird Al Yankovic.And if you have listened to enough of Mr. Yankovic’s song parodies, festooned with wordplay, you most likely have given this idea a fleeting thought: Who would be more perfect for the cruciverbal arts than the man who turned Robin Thicke’s song “Blurred Lines” into a song about bad writing? Why has the man never made a crossword puzzle?Our long national nightmare is over. Today, Mr. Yankovic makes his New York Times crossword debut, ably abetted by the constructor Eric Berlin. This is Mr. Berlin’s 40th puzzle for The Times.The theme today is cheese; yummy, delicious cheese and lots of it.We have four unique theme entries, and each one is a cheesy pun on a movie title. No, really. It involves actual cheese, not just things that are CORNy, although that’s in the puzzle, too.As an example, the clue at 20A, “Cheesy military drama?” hints at A FEW GOUDA MEN, a pun on the film “A Few Good Men.” Now you go partake of the rest of the cheese board.This might have made the clues too long, but I felt that a puzzle like this cried out for punnier clues. For example, at 28A’s FETA ATTRACTION, a pun on the film “Fatal Attraction,” I think a clue like “Thriller about an obsession with Greek cheese?” would have been fun.In nontheme news, I liked some of the fill that seemed like a nod to Mr. Yankovic, like Tom LEHRER and John CLEESE, in addition to the shout-outs to memories from his and Mr. Berlin’s childhoods, like Wile E. Coyote (TNT) and Star Trek (“HE’S dead, Jim”).7A: The entry space for “Shouts made with the waving of white hankies” was too short for WE SURRENDER, so it had to be OLÉS, as in the cheering people do in a corrida during a bullfight, right before they give up.42A: Tricky one! In its molten form, LAVA is a “rock that rolls.”32D: I like these “double meaning” clues because they really stretch your brain. “Coach … or what a coach is part of” is TRAIN, because to coach someone is to train them, and the coach is part of a railroad train.35A: What a coincidence. The singer SARA Bareilles is in the puzzle just days after her performance as Mary Magdalene in the electrifying televised concert, “Jesus Christ Superstar Live.” If you missed it, you can watch it in its entirety on NBC.com.48D: Were you tricked by the subtlety of the clue, “Acre’s land”? In today’s puzzle, Acre isn’t a measurement, it’s a city in ISRAEL. You’ve just been fooled by a veiled capital clue, which is when a proper name is stashed at the beginning of a clue so you don’t notice that there is an alternative reason for using a capital letter.Almost finished solving but just need a bit more help? We’ve got you covered.Warning: There be spoilers ahead, but now you can take a peek at the answer key. While the answers are free to everyone, the crossword puzzles require a subscription.Your thoughts?
