Catherine Sara Schwartz and Daniel Isaac Markowitz are to be married March 25 at Pen Ryn Estate in Bensalem, Pa. Rabbi Jennifer Goldsmith is to officiate.The bride, who is 29 and will be taking her husband’s name, is the director of marketing and communications in New York for the Metropolitan Coordinating Council on Jewish Poverty, which provides social services for poor New Yorkers. She graduated from Muhlenberg College and received a dual master's degree in public administration and Hebrew and Judaic Studies from New York University.She is a daughter of Marilyn B. Schwartz of Yardley, Pa., and Jerome L. Schwartz of Sunrise, Fla. The bride’s father is an accountant in private practice in Tamarac, Fla. Her mother is a founder and director of Kids' MusicRound, an early childhood music program based in Yardley that offers music classes for children ages 5 and younger.The groom, 28, is the director of animation at Driver Digital Studios, a production studio in New York. He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.He is the son of Dawn S. Markowitz and Dr. Arnold J. Markowitz of New York. The groom’s mother is the legal editor in New York for Trusts & Estates magazine. His father is a gastroenterologist at Memorial Sloan Kettering in New York.The couple met through OkCupid in February 2016, and quickly bonded over their interest in the Broadway show “Hamilton,” which Ms. Schwartz had already seen.“He wasn’t the kind of stereotypical guys I had been meeting online,” Ms. Schwartz said. “Guys who would write ridiculous things that they thought were clever.”They made plans to see “Hamilton” on their first date, set for March 1, but as it turned out, Ms. Schwartz scored tickets to “The Book of Mormon” for the same night, and asked Mr. Markowitz if he would still like to go along. He accepted her invitation, and before heading to the theater they went to dinner, where each earned a rave review from the other.“He was really handsome and really funny and smart,” Ms. Schwartz said.Mr. Markowitz, who admits to being “someone who is a little awkward and not very good when it comes to making small talk,” said “she was so bubbly and easy to talk to, the conversation just kept flowing.”Though their fourth date was a 12-hour marathon, “there were no awkward pauses,” Mr. Markowitz said. They went to the Central Park Zoo and lake, a bowling alley in Times Square, a movie followed by dinner followed by a trip to his apartment to watch “Saturday Night Live.”“We just never ran out of things to say,” he said. The dating was easy. The relationship grew.On March 1, 2017, their one-year anniversary, they decided to celebrate by going to see “Hamilton.”Unbeknown to Ms. Schwartz, Mr. Markowitz also planned on proposing that night. Through a friend of a friend who knew a member of the “Hamilton” cast, he arranged to take Ms. Schwartz onstage after the performance, where he would pop the question in front of family members and friends.Determined to keep his plan a secret, Mr. Markowitz returned home from work that night with the engagement ring hidden in one of his socks and later at the theater, he excused himself and went to the bathroom to switch the ring to a jacket pocket.“When I got back to my seat, I moved Catherine away from me every time she got close enough to feel the ring box,” he said.At show’s end, Mr. Markowitz told her he wanted to have their photo taken near the stage and was met there by the actress Mandy Gonzalez (who plays Angelica Schuyler.) Ms. Gonzalez, who knew what was about to happen, took them onstage where other cast members were milling around.Mr. Markowitz texted his sister to bring in both families, but he began sweating when she texted back: “Stall.”A few family members were about two minutes late, and now it was up to Mr. Markowitz, who feared security would soon escort him off the stage, to keep the conversation flowing until they arrived. “It was the longest few minutes of awkward small talk in my life,” he said.Mr. Markowitz and Ms. Schwartz were soon in the spotlight, surrounded by cast members and invited guests who watched him drop to one knee and begin another conversation, this one ending with her “Yes,” and a rousing ovation.
