SUNDAY PUZZLE — If I gave out some sort of recognition for puzzle of the week — and I don’t, because I believe that each puzzle should be recognized on its own merits — I would probably give it to this one by Priscilla Clark and Jeff Chen.Not only is it a fun idea, but the theme is particularly tight, by which I mean consistent, as Mr. Chen has said in some of his write ups on XWord Info. This means that the idea is repeated the same way in each theme entry, and each of those theme entries works equally well.Not everyone cares about that. I do, because I feel like it sets the bar a bit higher in terms of theme development. It’s one thing to come up with an idea that works for one entry; it’s much harder to develop an entire theme set where every entry adheres to the same rule. More important, I think it adds another level of satisfaction to the solving experience when everything it buttoned up. So kudos to Ms. Clark and Mr. Chen for an excellent Sunday outing, which is exactly what we expected and which has no plot twists whatsoever. Or does it?The first thing you did when you opened your puzzle, of course, was to read the title, “Surprise Endings,” yes?Then, of course, you glanced at the grid and noticed that the last letter in some of the entries is circled or perhaps shaded (who can keep up?). Could there be a connection between the title and calling attention to the last letters of the theme entries?It turns out that all nine of the theme entries are the names of films, and the clues mostly describe the plot of each movie until … PLOT TWIST! A change in the last letter of the movie title leads to a change in the description of the movie and, of course, hilarity ensues.Ready for an example? Let’s start at the top. At 23A, the clue is “Pimp launches career in rap … BUT HAS AN EPIC FAIL!” The first part of the clue (before the ellipsis) sounds a lot like the 2005 film, “HUSTLE AND FLOW,” whence the song “Hard Out Here for a Pimp” came. Ms. Clark and Mr. Chen change that last W in the title to a P, making it HUSTLE AND FLOP, which is the “EPIC FAIL!” they mention in the clue.The really neat part is the circled/shaded squares. Starting at the top and read down, they spell out the phrase PLOT TWIST.Now that you have the revealer and know that the theme entries are film titles, you should be able to work this theme out for yourself.So: All film titles, the change is all in the last letters, they’re all high quality puns clued brilliantly, and the circled/shaded letters spell out the very thing they are doing. That’s what constructors and editors mean by a tight theme. And this one is done extraordinarily well.18A: TIL about AVOCETS, which are wading birds, and definitely not the main ingredient in guacamole.26A: Watch the spelling in clues! “Apple buy-product?” is not the same as “Apple byproduct.” A “buy-product” would be something you buy, and today that an IPAD.36A: An ice shelf is a floating sheet of ice permanently attached to a landmass, and ice BERGs are what happen when pieces of the shelf break off, or are “calved.”102A: An Interesting Historical Sidenote: The GORDIAN knot has been seen in clues in The New York Times Crossword lately, but the word GORDIAN has not been in the puzzle since 1944. What knots in ties are more popular today, I wonder?13D: Let’s unpack this one. “Bussing” is not the same as “busing,” which means transporting people by bus. “Bussing” means kissing. And if you do it on a bus, you are allegedly engaging in a public display of affection, or a P.D.A. for short.15D: Wordplay alert! A “High mark in Spanish class?” sounds on first read like it might be an “A” or a “B,” but the answer is TILDE, because the “~” is a mark written above the letters in a Spanish class.Your thoughts?
