It might be best for all parties concerned if Al, Earn and Darius go back to just getting high on the couch. Lately, whenever they’ve ventured out of their living room, disaster has followed.What unfolds for Darius in this week’s extended episode is far more grim than the heartbreaks and headaches his friends have encountered recently. He embarks on one of his typically impulsive jaunts and ends up held captive in a Southern gothic nightmare.The episode opens at a hardware store, where Darius asks the clerk for dehydrated mango, ginger or jicama to snack on. He’s packing up a U-Haul truck, cranking up some Stevie Wonder and hitting the road. A quirk fest seems imminent. It’s been a while since we’ve seen Darius indulge his eccentric side and, frankly, some whimsical moments are overdue this season.From the moment he pulls up to a decaying, secluded mansion, though, it’s clear that whimsy is off the table. We get the classic “Don’t go in there!” setup, including an eerie voice croaking out of the security gate call-box, a large front door opening on its own and a dimly-lit, uninviting foyer. Then, Theodore Perkins emerges from the shadows and Darius should’ve fled the scene on sight.The creepy figure who goes by “Teddy” is an unapologetic spoof of pale, post-surgery Michael Jackson (judging by the voice, that seems to be Donald Glover beneath the unsettling prosthetic makeup and blue contact lenses).Teddy explains that he’s the caretaker for his invalid brother, former piano virtuoso Benny Hope. Darius is there to pick up a free piano with multicolored keys that was listed online, but he was unaware of the instrument’s famous connection.Intrigued, Darius peruses framed photos of dark-skinned Benny smiling alongside jazz and soul legends. To further solidify the Jackson parallels, Teddy says his brother developed a rare skin condition and can longer go out in the sunlight.By now, Darius has concluded that Benny and Teddy are one and the same. But since he’s not one to shy away from waving his own freak flag, Darius is not entirely put off by this falsetto-voiced oddball.Over the course of the 41-minute episode, there are warning signs galore. A significant number of viewers might have left immediately at the sight of Teddy sticking his hand into the liquid center of a soft-boiled ostrich egg. Still more would have sought the exit when he revealed that his butler intercom was, in fact, just a tape recorder to remind him of things like “Finish that hat for Dionne Warwick” and “Wash your hands … immediately.”“I really, really want this piano, man,” Darius explains to Al over the phone. “You willing to die for it?” Al asks, trying to reason with him. “He sounds like a serial killer.”The visit becomes about more than just the instrument. Darius is a man of principle: “If I leave, I’ll regret it. And I have a two-regret life limit pact,” he tells Al, pacing. “Somebody gotta take me out if I go over two.”He re-enters the house after taking his breather on the patio and finds Teddy standing in a makeshift gift shop dedicated to all things Benny. The collection of T-shirts, tumblers and key chains is just a teaser to the main attraction. “I really think you’ll like what I have in store,” Teddy says, opening a pair of creaky double doors.“My father used to say ‘Great things come from great pain,’” he says, gesturing to a mannequin wearing a suit. Teddy has placed his stern taskmaster (and tormentor) on a literal pedestal and explains this room will be dedicated to “Great Fathers.” Here, writer Donald Glover pulls no punches in calling out famous dads whose goal-oriented parenting methods have raised eyebrows over the years. Joe Jackson is on the list, along with the fathers of Tiger Woods and Serena Williams, and even “the father that drops off Emilio Estevez in ‘The Breakfast Club.’” This twisted memorial is still not enough to dissuade Darius from his mission, and on he goes.Regrets or no regrets, when he finally gets his hands on the piano and notices a drop of blood on one of the keys, you know it’s time he got out of there quickly, even if it is empty-handed. But as the tension builds, Darius wheels the piano into an elevator.Teddy instructed him to meet him in the lobby, but when the camera pans over the button marked “B,” it’s clear Darius is doomed to land in the basement. “Fine, destiny,” he sighs, walking into the dark space filled with creaking pipes and a roaring furnace.Earlier, Darius deduced that “Benny made up Teddy to make up for the fact that he made himself look like a ghoul.” The logic seemed sound, especially since there was no sign of another man in the house. When a masked figure in a wheelchair wearing a red smoking jacket like Teddy’s wordlessly wheels himself over to Darius, it’s reasonable to assume it is Teddy, and his games are getting increasingly warped. Using a chalkboard, the figure warns Darius that both their lives are in danger and tells him to find a gun in the attic.Fed up at long last, Darius rolls his eyes and goes to leave with his piano, only to find his truck is now blocked in by a car. This is no longer just a creepy recluse toying with an unsuspecting guest.The basement-dweller was right about the gun in the attic, only Teddy’s now pointing it at Darius on the second floor. He turns away from obsessively watching home movies of his childhood trauma to explain his deranged plan. Teddy’s going to frame Darius as a homicidal home invader, making him take the fall for Benny’s death. This is full-on “Whatever Happened to Baby Jane?” madness and we still don’t even have hard proof that there truly is a Benny. Until we do. And then, the whole macabre affair ends in abrupt tragedy.Moments before the fraternal murder-suicide, Darius tried to soothe his deeply damaged captor. “Not all great things come from great pain. Sometimes, it’s love,” he said. But it was too little, too late. Ultimately, all he could do was bear witness to the dysfunctional brothers’ bloody end.In the final scene, a Stevie track plays — this time, fittingly forlorn — as Darius watches the police wheel out one body-bag, then another and lastly, the prized piano.If it wasn’t clear before this week, by now it should be crystal: “Atlanta” isn’t here to give you the kind of sitcom you might want. Donald Glover is here to deliver the kind of genre-defying vignettes he wants.• The writers love to reference “Get Out.” This week, when Teddy takes a surprise snapshot of Darius, he jumps and says, “I’m not a big photo person,” calling to mind the movie scene in which a camera flash causes Lakeith Stanfield’s sunken place character to freak out.• Darius’s lock screen image proved divisive when we first saw it in February. Malcolm X, M.L.K. and Allen Iverson shooting dice while the Obamas, Oprah and others look on? That’s just the kind of defiant art you’d expect to appeal to a guy who altered his new “Southern Made” stars-and-bars trucker hat to read “U Mad.”• There was no shortage of celebrity shade this episode: “I find it never quite grew out of its adolescence,” Teddy said of rap. “I wouldn’t say that,” Darius replied. “We got Jay-Z. He’s like 65.”• There’s nothing shady here, though: It truly is jarring what you can find if you take Darius’s suggestion and type “Sammy Sosa hat” into a search engine.
