SUNDAY PUZZLE — Happy April Fools’ Day! As you have probably surmised, what we have on our hands today is a rebus. If you’re here because you know this and the puzzle machine is giving you no love no matter how you enter that rebus, I thought you might want to have a link to the correct approach forthwith and before anything else can be revealed.Let me be candid: Only by banding together with a can-do attitude will we not abandon this demanding errand.There are nine theme answers, all running across, that consist of either a phrase or full name. In each of these entries one part consists of five letters: a first letter, a three-letter word that is common to every theme answer and a last letter. The title equation of the puzzle, 1 + 1 = 5, is a hint: 1 first letter “plus” 1 last letter = a five-letter word.But something doesn’t add up, right? Well, think of a simple substitution for “plus”: AND. It’s three letters, a component of tons of words and when inserted between a beginning and ending letter, makes for a FIVE letter word; all five letters are contained by a single square, running across in each of these answers.As an additional cue, you’ve got nine clues crossing on the downs that use those two outside letters from each of the above phrases, in sequence, themselves — omitting the “and.”Let’s look at an example, 49A: “‘I need everyone’s help!’”. If you’re on a ship, or even just in an office where people try to sound dramatic, this is a call for ALL HANDS ON DECK. But this answer doesn’t fit; you need to enter ALL H + S ON DECK, and the H + S (or HANDS, or HS) needs to squeeze into the fourth square across.Meanwhile, at 31D, you’ve got a six-letter word for “Reddish-purple.” I couldn’t find any colors that fit, and the strange “H+S” at the fourth spot is an indication for the color FUCHSIA.A few of the across-themed clues are nostalgic but not terribly obscure (one was an excellent debut and one-off, A FISH CALLED WANDA), and Mr. Ezersky nonchalantly pulls references from the 1730s and the 1970s, among other eras. I suppose when one is the age of Mr. Ezersky everything that’s not on Snapchat counts as nostalgia. As is mentioned in his notes, today marks the first Ezersky Sunday puzzle, which means he’s now constructed grids for all seven days, surely the first of many, many times he will “hit for the cycle.” Mr. Ezersky, please stay away from steroids, as we’d hate to have to put an asterisk next to your name in the 2050 record books.22A: This is a new clue for an age-old entry, AVE MARIA. It’s often nice to be reminded of wonderful things from the past, in this case “Fantasia.” There’s an interesting history to this movie; it had an enormous creative army behind it and the first stereophonic movie soundtrack, but it was initially such a failure that it nearly drove Disney out of business.Nowadays, even though it feels like we are inundated with streaming content, I wonder how someone would watch a movie like this, unless they still had a DVD or VHS player and could either buy a recording or rent it from their library. Disney is planning a streaming service in a year but it’s a good example of an incontrovertible classic that isn’t at our fingertips.32A: Not sure if this tripped people up, but a cute variety of misdirection. What do you hope people have when they leave? If I’m the people, then it’s a) keys, b) wallet with MetroCard, c) laptop for work, d) phone, e) headphones and f) head, which I would forget if it weren’t screwed on. Here, though, it’s NICE DAY, which is a nice thing to say to someone when you’re parting ways (nicer than “have a nice life!” — which has unpleasant undertones).56A: Any cereal I was given as a child came with fiber and umlauts, but no toys. Any freebie from one of the boxes I got would have been either educational or utilitarian; conservation flash cards or carrot seeds, maybe. Not till today did I realize the toys and the cereal could be a TIE-IN to something else, like a movie or a TV show. I didn’t even get to go down that aisle; we stayed on the supermarket perimeter and now I have no shut-off valve and lose it to an embarrassing degree when exposed to sweets (see 23A, although I’m certainly not a kid).108A: This clue sent me to my mental spice drawer, as that’s what I initially thought of as “used in a pinch.” That was wrong, but even though I had heard the term “pinch of snuff” many times, for some weird reason I’d always thought that snuff was opium. I imagined the founding fathers inhaling ample amounts of opium while they devised our nation’s blueprint, and for some reason a spittoon was involved. Not true! Snuff is just TOBACCO. In my highbrow research endeavors I uncovered a really cute fable about a “pinch of snuff,” if you feel like reading a mash-up of O. Henry and Judaica.120A: A massé is a trick shot in pool, from the Old French for sledgehammer. The move is more delicate than you’d think, given that fact; it’s also known as a SPIN SHOT. I suppose that not all spin shots are massés, but I think all massés are spin shots, since the spin is what lets the ball move so precisely. On another note, if any one of you happens to watch the below video and become a professional pool player because of it, please let the Wordplay team know, so that we can provide you with a snazzy sponsorship patch for your vest.41D: “Reaches” seemed to be a good entry here for “Makes a connection,” meaning a meeting of the minds between two people. The meaning implied by the right answer, LIAISES, is a little bit different, indicating the use of a go-between or some form of collaboration. This is a useful puzzle entry with all those vowels, I’m sure.51D: Unless you knew TV-MA was the entry at 61A (a red herring for me for a while, since the numbers in the title of this puzzle led me to “NC-17”), then LEMMESEE might have been a tough one to figure out here. It’s a debut; the stodgier “Let me see” appears pretty often.95D: Back in the clackety 20th century we would create TABSETS to format manuscripts and letters, typed on a manual or electric typewriter. They still exist in word programs, but I don’t think they’re referred to often; you could also use the term for the dozens of tabbed pages you have open in a browser after you look online at, well, anything these days.Does something still not compute? Throw that calculator out the window and take a peek at the answer key. While the answers are free to everyone, the Crossword puzzles require a subscription.What did you think?
