The musician Questlove, author most recently of “Creative Quest,” grew up reading to his father on car trips. “At the time it seemed like father-son bonding. Now I think maybe he was tricking me.” What books are on your nightstand?I go through things in batches, and recently I’ve been trying to read more about movies. The top book on the nightstand is Owen Gleiberman’s “Movie Freak,” which is about his love of movies and his life as a movie-lover. Who is your favorite novelist of all time? And your favorite novelist writing today?I don’t read as much fiction. I’m not a fiction person. I tend to go for biographies and oral histories and books about art of all kinds. I was gifted copies of Ishmael Reed novels like “The Free-Lance Pallbearers” and “Mumbo Jumbo,” and those were really eye-opening. What book, if any, most influenced your decision to become a musician or contributed to your artistic development?In terms of becoming a musician, I was influenced most by my family — my dad was a musician, and he had a singing group with my mom, and my sister and I toured around with them. When I read about musicians at that time, it tended to be in magazines, which were still healthy. Rolling Stone had a huge impact on me. There were some books that nudged me in the same direction, though. Because Dad was mentioned in David Ritz’s “Divided Soul,” I read that, and I also read Nelson George’s “The Michael Jackson Story.” Who are your favorite musician-writers? Your favorite memoir by a musician?There are some usual suspects: Miles Davis’s book with Quincy Troupe, Charles Mingus’s “Beneath the Underdog.” One of my favorites is a fairly recent book, “Root for the Villain,” by J-Zone. It’s by a rapper, about his inability to make it. It’s a brilliant book, and it scared the crap out of me — I have never seen someone revel in his failure quite the way he does. Favorite cookbook or book about food?When I wrote “Something to Food About,” I looked at so many books and cookbooks by chefs like Dominique Crenn, Massimo Bottura, Michael Solomonov, Ferran Adrià and others. I also got into “Modernist Cuisine: The Art and Science of Cooking,” written by a team led by Nathan Myhrvold, and I haven’t gotten out yet — it’s a giant multivolume project that’s impossible to finish. They have a new book out about bread and I got to see part of the process of making that book when I visited Nathan’s Willy Wonka laboratory. Apart from the books I read to write “Something to Food About,” there’s a book called “Vegan Soul Kitchen,” by Bryant Terry, that was very important to me. It has recipes in it, but it also talks about the social and racial history of soul food. It inspired my 200-day run with vegetarianism. “The Cooking Gene,” by Michael W. Twitty, is also a must-read. What books might we be surprised to find on your bookshelves?I read lots of self-help books. Therapists are big on seeing you in person and on a consistent basis, so finding one who is willing to video chat at odd hours is rare. Also, I’m usually at my lowest when I’m about to make a record, which is when I have the least time to go and see someone. For that reason, when I need to reframe my way of thinking and be clear about the ways I might be sabotaging a process, I consult self-help books. Two recent ones I read were “Battlefield of the Mind,” by Joyce Meyer, and “Confidence: Overcoming Low Self-Esteem, Insecurity, and Self-Doubt,” by Tomas Chamorro-Premuzic. Look, his name is literally pre-music. What are the best books about music you’ve read?It’s hard to pick just one or even just five or 10. I get different things from each book. Sometimes I’m looking for out-of-the-way stories. Sometimes I’m looking for practical advice. Greg Tate made me want to be a writer. I was amazed that a musician was so fluid and had enough knowledge to describe and analyze other people’s music so well. I read him in The Village Voice, but his work was collected in books like “Flyboy in the Buttermilk.” What’s the last book you read that made you laugh?Jenifer Lewis’s memoir, “The Mother of Black Hollywood.” She’s an actress who has worked in television and film for decades. She played Tupac’s mother in “Poetic Justice” and Tina Turner’s mother in “What’s Love Got to Do With It?” Now she’s in “Black-ish.” Her book was hilarious. I listened to the audiobook, and it was so good that it made me step up my audiobook game for “Creative Quest.” The last book you read that made you cry?After Prince died, a wave of books came out: Duane Tudahl’s book on the “Purple Rain” studio sessions, Ben Greenman’s “Dig if You Will the Picture” and Mayte Garcia’s “The Most Beautiful.” I wrote forewords for some of them. To see Prince humanized, to see his effect on other writers and thinkers, made it all that much harder to reconcile with the fact that he was gone. The last book you read that made you furious?“Fire and Fury,” and not for the reasons you would think. I mainly thought about how the president would drop his guard for this guy. I don’t feel bad for him; you get what you have coming to you. But when I researched the author and started to understand how he must have portrayed himself to get access, what does that say about the president’s judgment, or self-awareness, or even self-protection? I had to set the book aside at some point pretty early on. What kind of reader were you as a child? Your favorite book? Most beloved character?When my family and I drove to shows, not only was I my dad’s GPS, but I was also his human audiobook. He would make me read to him, hours at a time, from the novelizations of whatever movies were current: “Close Encounters of the Third Kind,” “Raiders of the Lost Ark,” “Jaws,” whatever. At the time it seemed like father-son bonding. Now I think maybe he was tricking me.My favorite children’s book was Dr. Seuss’ “My Book About Me,” which is a kind of guided workbook that lets you write your own autobiography. I carried it around as if I wrote it, which I guess I did. I was so proud. To this day, I love that book — I probably have 50 blank copies of it in storage. I was also obsessed with a series called “The Happy Hollisters.” It’s about a family of younger kids (the oldest are tweens) who go on adventures, not ghosts and goblins, but more realistic ones, like Hardy Boys-type mysteries. I really got into them. Those were a big deal for me. If you had to name one book that made you who you are today, what would it be?“The Autobiography of Malcolm X” changed my life. I read it when I was 15, and that — along with discovering Public Enemy and Afrocentric hip-hop — kind of went hand in hand as a consciousness-builder and creator. If you could require the president to read one book, what would it be?“Marvin K. Mooney Will You Please Go Now!” You’re hosting a literary dinner party. Which three writers are invited?Alex Haley, because of Malcolm X. Do they have to be living? Let me start over. I would say two women whom I have met in real life and hung out with: bell hooks and Fran Lebowitz. For the third, let’s say Quincy Jones. I know he isn’t thought of mainly as an author, but he has written books, and if I am hosting a dinner party, I’ll be damned if he’s not there. Disappointing, overrated, just not good: What book did you feel as if you were supposed to like, and didn’t? Do you remember the last book you put down without finishing?I’m kind of obsessive about finishing books, even if it takes me a while. I don’t want to single out any books — now that I know how hard they are to write, I don’t like saying that books are disappointing just because they didn’t get through to me in the right way — but if I had to pick one, I would pick my own book on “Soul Train.” I want to take another shot at it. When I did that book, I had to break my thinking into separate themed essays. I want to redo it as a definitive project. What’s the one book you wish someone else would write?I have a very specific idea. I’m obsessed with the real conditions that afflicted working musicians, and I have an idea that looks at race and music in the middle of the 20th century. I don’t want to tip my hand. Maybe I’ll end up being the someone else who writes it. Who would you want to write your life story?Well, I already wrote my life story, “Mo’ Meta Blues,” but my thinking about how to redo it has more to do with genres. I’ve been really into audiobooks lately. When I get around to doing the audio version of that book the way I want, I think it would be great to hear my life reflected through voices that aren’t me. So maybe it’s not about writing my life story so much as re-presenting it as a communal kind of radio play. What books do you find yourself returning to again and again?Every woman I have ever dated, with the exception of my current (and hopefully final) girlfriend, made it a deal breaker that I go through the whole “Harry Potter” series. It hasn’t worked, but I have acquired at least six or seven sets of Potters. What books are you embarrassed not to have read yet?I read “The Great Gatsby” in high school, though I think maybe at the last minute I ended up Cliffs Noting part of it. (Still got a B!) I want to sit down and read it again, fo real, with a group. What do you plan to read next?I’m excited for Michelle Obama’s book, “Becoming.” I can’t wait to see her take on life in the White House.
