Original headline: “No Longer the Punch-Line State; Lauryn Hill, the Sopranos and others are unapologetic New Jerseyans,” from April 1999. Beyond the Boss: New Jersey chic used to have a name: Bruce Springsteen. And that was pretty much it, at least according to the Garden State’s haughty neighbors across the Hudson River, a point that justifiably rankled generations of New Jerseyans. No matter how much New Jersey natives fired back by extolling the virtues of spacious split-levels on family-friendly half-acre lots, or summer beach strolls in Cape May, or even New Jersey’s rich literary legacy (forget Brooklyn Heights; Norman Mailer was from Long Branch!), New Yorkers long took it as a birthright to dump on their neighbors to the west. As the writer Frank DeCaro put it in this Clinton-era Styles cover story: “New Jersey didn’t become a national punch line — ridiculed as a repository of industrial waste and bad taste — without reason. The words ‘New Jersey’ conjure up sights and smells for many nonresidents of the northern stretch of the New Jersey Turnpike — tank farm after pipeline after brewery.” And that was from a guy who grew up in the town of Little Falls! Say it ain’t so, Joe (Piscopo): Consider the deeper context. As recently as the ’80s, even Jersey natives like Mr. Piscopo, from Passaic, were expected to milk their home state for easy laughs. Remember his Paulie Herman character from “Saturday Night Live”? The whole gag was built around the supposed horror of being trapped with the Jersey-est of Jerseyites in, say, a diner booth as he squawked, “I’m from Jersey? Are you from Jersey?” In that same era, Mr. Piscopo, along with Eddie Murphy, delivered another brutal (and not unfunny) sketch called “New Jersey Vice,” in which they played doofus versions of Crockett and Tubbs, bumbling around the swamps of New Jersey in a battered jalopy trying to look cool in pastel suits.Saviors rise from the streets: The pendulum had to swing eventually, and sure enough, by 1999, the Garden State was in full bloom, according to Mr. DeCaro. Exhibit A: Lauryn Hill, of South Orange, then “the most popular woman in hip-hop,” shouted to a sold-out Madison Square Garden, “New York, let me take you out to New Jersey and bring New Jersey back,” without, he added, “a trace of irony or condescension.” By that point, the article argued, New Jersey had “captured the attention of moviegoers, readers and couch potatoes alike,” thanks in part to Generation X film directors from New Jersey like Kevin Smith (“Clerks,” “Chasing Amy”) and Todd Solondz (“Welcome to the Dollhouse,” “Happiness”), not to mention a certain HBO show involving an angst-ridden mob boss. It was the dawn of a “post-Springsteen school,” Mr. De Caro wrote, “that has rethought the suburbs as a place of humor, color and intrigue. These works recast New Jersey’s little towns as Peyton Places with secrets in every cupboard, and they raise the question: If the suburbs are so boring, why is this stuff so fascinating?”The “Sopranos” effect: It’s hard to overstate the impact of “The Sopranos,” a show that not only invented the concept of prestige television, but also peeled back the layers of the New Jersey psyche like an onion. Created by David Chase, who grew up in Essex County, and starring James Gandolfini, from Park Ridge, the show “touched off the kind of enthusiasm among hip audiences that ‘Twin Peaks’ did nine years ago,” Mr. DeCaro wrote. This “suburban comedy wrapped in a mob drama inside a cannoli” was “as much about New Jersey as it is about the mob,” its episodes peppered with insider references to pastry shops in Nutley, psychiatrists’ offices in Montclair and formal wear places in Paramus. The show’s influence was so great that it even managed to elevate Mr. Gandolfini, the bearish actor who played Tony Soprano, into a sex symbol after playing bit-player thugs in movies including “True Romance.” But nothing in “The Sopranos” was sexier than the setting itself. “My intention is to present New Jersey as a place of contrasts, like it really is,” Mr. Chase was quoted as saying. “I have a feeling that people think it’s only a toxic dump. That’s why I include shots of the waterfall and the more bucolic scenes. For such a small place, it has a lot of facets to it. And that’s only northern New Jersey. I wish we could go down the shore, but on our budget we can’t, sort of like when I was in high school.”Calling in reinforcements: It made sense that New Jersey was suddenly embraced by the cool crowd, Mr. DeCaro argued, since seemingly every other celebrity turned out to be from there. A Vanity Fair story from a few years earlier, “Garden State Babylon,” listed more than 120 New Jersey-bred celebrities and influencers, including Charles Addams and Pia Zadora, broken down by turnpike exit. Meryl Streep, Martha Stewart, Bruce Willis, Jack Nicholson, Deborah Harry, Tom Cruise — was anyone super-famous not from New Jersey? And then there was that little-known comedian from Lawrenceville, Jon Stewart, before he transformed comedy television with “The Daily Show.” No wonder that by 1999, New Jersey had “gone from a private shame to a juggernaut,” as the playwright Paul Rudnick, from Piscataway, was quoted as saying.Fast forward: Two decades later, those old New Jersey jokes sound as dated as a Bob Hope routine (although Jersey bashing enjoyed a brief renaissance with “Jersey Shore”). Sure, the Nets fled the Meadowlands for Brooklyn. But lately, the real flow seems to be going the other way, as stratospheric real estate prices in New York City have inspired members of the creative class to decamp to the Boss’s backyard to live, raise families and, you know, “create.” The migration is enough of a thing that Time Out New York ran an article a few years ago, “The Coolest Places in New Jersey for New Yorkers,” that offered Garden State alternatives to New York neighborhoods: Montclair as Greenwich Village; Jersey City as Williamsburg; Westfield as the Upper East Side; and so forth. It was a useful guide for would-be colonizers, surely. But ask any Jerseyite: They really don’t need New York publications to tell them they’re cool, thank you very much.A Garden State of mind: “I was born in Manhattan,” Mr. DeCaro said last week, “which technically makes me a New York native, but as Neve Campbell says in the movie ‘54,’ let’s face it, I’m Jersey. It took me only 25 years of living in the city — and now five years of living in Los Angeles — to be able to say that. Today, from 3,000 miles away, I appreciate my home state like never before. In L.A., I proudly wear a Jersey Strong T-shirt and drink my morning coffee out of a Lincoln Tunnel mug, suburb-side forward. And, after all this time, I can finally, proudly admit something: My exit is 153-B.”
