Twenty years after Samuel Fuller’s death, his complete oeuvre is becoming available on disc — one jolt at a time. The last of the remaining stragglers is the 1961 crime-syndicate classic, “Underworld U.S.A.,” out on Blu-ray from Twilight Time. It’s a movie of which the British critic V. F. Perkins wrote, “every shot is a smack in the eye.”Written, directed and produced by Fuller, “Underworld U.S.A.” initiated the luridly stylized, expertly crafted B-movies — blunt and punchy as a tabloid front page — that make up Fuller’s trilogy of despair. (The other two, “Shock Corridor,” from 1963, depicting America as a madhouse, and “The Naked Kiss,” from 1964, in which seemingly wholesome small-town America proves too corrupt for a retired prostitute, are available from Criterion.)“Underworld U.S.A.” asserts that the business of America is crime, something Fuller reinforces with a statement in the film’s original trailer, included as an extra. The crime syndicate is a giant corporation operating a legitimate business blandly named National Projects and protected by dishonest public officials and by skillful public relations. Set in a world in which feds and crooks, both equally coldblooded, work in equivalent skyscraper offices, “Underworld U.S.A.” globalizes the post-Kefauver Committee mob films of the 1950s. It’s not just a single town but the entire country that is threatened by this quasi-military, community-service-oriented entity.The narrative arc owes something to “The Big Heat,” Fritz Lang’s 1953 film noir about an ex-cop who destroys a crime syndicate while avenging his wife’s death. The protagonist of Fuller’s bleak world is not an F.B.I. man but a rogue safecracker, Tolly Devlin (Cliff Robertson), who is motivated by vengeance to bring down the criminals who killed his father.Opening with a tight close-up of the teenage Tolly’s eyes as he prepares to roll a drunk in a back alley, “Underworld U.S.A.” ends some 20 years later in the same alley. Robertson, given an early starring role, plays Tolly with an incredulous smirk. His fixed sneer is as stylized as a Kabuki mask in his love scenes with the vulnerable gang moll known as Cuddles (Dolores Dorn, bleached blond and poignantly frowzy).The secondary characters are largely cartoons. Fuller cast a former vaudeville star, Beatrice Kay, as Tolly’s would-be guardian angel — a role that might have been written for Thelma Ritter, James Stewart’s no-nonsense nurse in “Rear Window.” Robert Emhardt’s boss of bosses is a rotund, weak-chinned geek out of the comic strip “Dick Tracy.” Richard Rust may not have been the first hit man to wear shades in preparation for a kill but he seems to have established the cliché several years before the director Don Siegel used it in “The Killers.”“Underworld U.S.A.” is as economical as it is hyper dramatic. When it opened in neighborhood theaters on a double-bill with a lesser gangster film, “Mad Dog Coll,” the New York Times reviewer Howard Thompson praised Fuller’s direction as “nimble, particularly in his use of close-ups.” The brutal action and allegorical mise-en-scène look forward to John Boorman’s alienated gangster-vigilante in the 1967 film “Point Blank,” even as Fuller’s harsh lighting gives the Columbia back lot the shadowy distortions of a German Expressionist woodcut.IN ITS STARK VISUALS, “Underworld U.S.A.” harks back to Lang, a Fuller favorite, whose last two American movies, “Beyond a Reasonable Doubt” and “While the City Sleeps,” both released by RKO in 1956, are newly available on Blu-ray from Warner Archive. (Both are in the wide-screen format used for their European release.)Neither is nearly as flavorsome or kinetic as “Underworld U.S.A.” although “While the City Sleeps,” in which a juvenile delinquent serial killer stalks Manhattan, does build to a rattling finale, and “Beyond a Reasonable Doubt,” about a man who lands himself on death row, has a powerful kicker.What appeals to their fans, who included Jacques Rivette and other French critics of the 1950s, is their abstract, unadorned minimalism — which the film scholar David Bordwell has suggested was enhanced by RKO’s retrofitted SuperScope process — as well as strong echoes of early Lang films. “We are plunged into a world of necessity, all the more apparent in that it coexists so harmoniously with the arbitrariness of the premises,” Rivette wrote of the irrational plot Lang seemed to feel no obligation to explain in “Beyond a Reasonable Doubt,” praising Lang as “the cineaste of the concept.”“While the City Sleeps” and “Beyond a Reasonable Doubt” are urban crime stories with newspaper backgrounds, both starring a bored-looking Dana Andrews as a star journalist. (“While the City Sleeps” compensates with a strong supporting cast that includes Ida Lupino, George Sanders and Thomas Mitchell as exaggerated newshound types, with Vincent Price as their paper’s ungainly, epicene owner.) Both movies feature familiar Lang characters, kin to the serial killer introduced in “M” and the trapped innocents of “You Only Live Once” and “Scarlet Street.”“While the City Sleeps” updates “M” to include references to the presumed malign influence of violent comic books and has a reporter use television to taunt the so-called Lipstick Killer (absurdly played by John Barrymore Jr. wearing a leather jacket and motorcycle cap à la Marlon Brando in “The Wild One”).“Beyond a Reasonable Doubt” pares down the “wrong man” premise of earlier films noir to have the Andrews character planting self-incriminating clues to an unsolved murder. Intending to expose the flaws in the criminal justice system, he winds up on death row when his carefully documented alibis go up in flames.Visually barren and somewhat enervated, the movie nevertheless has a powerful sense of implacable fate — Lang’s not least. “Beyond a Reasonable Doubt” might have been named for his 1920 melodrama, “The Weary Death”; set in Weimar Berlin it could have been a gem.BAAL Rainer Werner Fassbinder plays the title role, a loutish, charismatic poet, in Volker Schlöndorff’s modern version of Bertolt Brecht’s Expressionist play, made for television in 1970. Enhancing the Fassbinder flavor, the movie features several of his close associates, including Hanna Schygulla and Irm Hermann. On Blu-ray and DVD. (Criterion)A FISTFUL OF DYNAMITE Also known as “Duck, You Sucker,” Sergio Leone’s last spaghetti western, originally released in 1972 and now on Blu-ray, was his most overtly political. Rod Steiger and James Coburn team as a pair of revolutionaries with Steiger unfortunately cast as a Mexican peon and Coburn as a visiting Irish bomb-thrower. Writing about the movie in 2003, the New York Times critic Elvis Mitchell called it “rapturous and more than slightly insane.” (Kino Lorber)HE WALKED BY NIGHT Richard Basehart plays a clever killer in this tense 1948 policier, directed by Alfred Werker (with an uncredited assist from Anthony Mann) and beautifully shot by the great film noir cinematographer John Alton. The movie was praised by The New York Times as “a taut and realistic melodrama” when it opened in 1949. Out on Blu-ray and DVD. (Classic Flix)THE KLANSMAN There’s a bit of Sam Fuller remaining in this mangled revision of his original screenplay — a blatantly sensationalist denunciation of Southern racism — retooled as a vehicle for a Richard Burton whose awful performance exerts a certain fascination. The supporting cast includes Lee Marvin, Lola Falana, Linda Evans and, in his first movie role, O. J. Simpson as a black militant. Available on Blu-ray, DVD, and Amazon Video. (Olive Films)TERROR IN A TEXAS TOWN An unsung B-movie master, best known for the classic “Gun Crazy,” Joseph H. Lewis made his last movie from a script by Dalton Trumbo, still blacklisted and hence uncredited. Although it was released in 1958, the movie was not reviewed in The Times until 1991, when Stephen Holden wrote that, “made for a song in a matter of days, it is a cut-rate ‘High Noon,’ whose final showdown pits Sterling Hayden, armed only with a harpoon, against a professional gunman.” Intimations of “Moby-Dick!” The movie has been restored on Blu-ray. (Arrow Academy)
