To the Editor:Re “Trump Accuses Comey of Lying to the Senate” (front page, June 10):How can President Trump say “no collusion, no obstruction,” based on the public testimony given by James B. Comey, former F.B.I. director, to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence? Everyone knows that the most sensitive information and, potentially, the most damaging, is not being released to the general public at this time, and is available only to the committee and to the special counsel, Robert Mueller, behind closed doors.ALAN GOLDFARBSAN RAFAEL, CALIF.To the Editor:The disgraceful charade in Washington has gone on long enough. It’s time for all sides to put up or shut up. If there is any evidence that Donald Trump colluded with Russia, it should be released now. If not, further insinuation that he’s involved is nothing more than a scandalous waste of time and energy.For his part, the president should turn over, or make public, any “tapes” he has and should follow through with his statement that he is willing to be questioned under oath. This should all happen immediately.The real business of the nation should not be held hostage to innuendo, leak-based sniping and early morning tweets.MARC VENEZIANO, MILTON, GA.To the Editor:Please, please do not let Donald Trump testify under oath. He will trample that process as he has almost every other convention of civilized democratic government. And how do we then explain to our children that an oath no longer has any meaning?ANNE LAMEK, ALLISTON, ONTARIOTo the Editor:Our intelligence agencies have unanimously agreed that Russia interfered with the 2016 election. I am concerned that public attention has been diverted from preventing a recurrence of foreign electoral obstruction to musing about President Trump’s political vulnerabilities.We vote again in less than 18 months. Questions about the president’s conduct and possible interference into the F.B.I.’s investigation can wait. Russia can’t. Russia is the threat. Russia is the problem. Russia should be our focus. That, surely, we can all agree on.PETER PHILLIPS, MONTCLAIR, N.J.To the Editor:Regarding “Trump Calls Comey ‘Cowardly’ in Latest Twitter Outburst” (nytimes.com, June 11):It seems to me that a coward is someone who sends out tweets in the middle of the night — misleading, deceptive, indecipherable tweets — and refuses to answer questions at a news conference, instead hiding behind his press spokesmen and women when explanations are needed from the chief tweeter.It seems to me that a coward is not someone who is willing to take all questions from friends and foes, who follows the evidence and the law wherever it goes because that’s his job and he loves his country, someone who is not afraid to take on the Democratic candidate for president two weeks before the election or the president of the United States. And risk and lose his job as a result of his dedication.The latter is and will be seen historically as a hero!JOHN E. COLBERTARROYO SECO, N.M.To the Editor:Re “Resigned to President’s Woes, G.O.P. Keeps Working on Legislative Goals” (news article, June 8):In reference to James Comey’s testimony that President Trump “hoped” that he could let the investigation of Michael Flynn go, Speaker Paul Ryan said, “The president’s new at this.”Well, I’m from a small town in Indiana. I have never taken a law course and I have never served in elective office, and yet I know it is totally inappropriate to ask a law enforcement officer to influence an investigation.What exactly is it that President Trump is new at? Knowing that the United States is a country of laws? Possibly. That he actually has to obey the law? Probably. That he cannot always have his way? Undoubtedly.JANICE LILLY, BLOOMINGTON, IND.
