Since before President Trump was elected — and with greater frequency afterward — historians, political scientists and journalists have wondered how autocratic our democracy might become.Here is some evidence of how the public sees it. Bright Line Watch, a consortium of political scientists formed after the 2016 election, just released a survey of 2000 voters that shows public faith in 27 key democratic principles — ranging from the independence of the judiciary to constitutional limits on executive power — has declined across the board.Four political scientists — Gretchen Helmke of the University of Rochester, Brendan Nyhan and John Carey of Dartmouth, and Susan Stokes of Yale — report that from September 2017 to January 2018, voters’ assessments of the ability of the courts, Congress and the Constitution to “effectively check executive power dropped by 7-8 percentage points.” In the same period, “confidence that the elected branches respect judicial independence fell by 17 percentage points.”The results also revealHelmke and her colleagues warn that these trends constitute a threat to democracy:The release of the Bright Line survey comes at a moment when Trump has once again defied traditional norms and constraints concerning the treatment of political opponents.On Monday, he charged that Democratic members of the House and Senate were treasonous in their failure to applaud him during his State of the Union address. In a speech in Blue Ash, Ohio, Trump described how he saw it:One day later, Trump declared:The decline of public faith in America’s democratic institutions can be seen in the accompanying chart describing Bright Line’s findings.Those polled were asked to rate whether the United States fully meets, mostly meets, partly meets or does not meet more than two dozen principles of democracy. The bars in the graphic capture the drop in the percentage of people who agree that the United States fully or mostly lives up to democratic standards.The authors of the analysis of the survey conclude that the “overall picture is sobering,” citing public agreement “that the performance of U.S. democracy has declined” during Trump’s tenure in office.The degradation of politics, in the view of Kathleen Dolan, a political scientist at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, has complex roots.“The damage being done is twofold,” Dolan wrote by email:This is only part of “the more general problem we are having today with the success Trump and others have had in creating the view that there is no objective truth,” Dolan argued:While polarization has created a political universe composed of two truths, one Democratic, the other Republican, Trump has driven, and profited from, this duality.“Am I concerned that Trump’s attacks on the Department of Justice, the F.B.I. and the ongoing investigations into collusion may undermine fundamental institutions and norms including the rule of law?” Shanto Iyengar, a political scientist at Stanford, wrote me by email. “For sure.”Iyengar posed the following hypothetical:Trump’s attacks on the F.B.I. are a case study in his polarization strategy. Since its founding in 1908, the F.B.I. has had substantial popular support, especially among Republicans. Historic poll data is revealing. A 1949 Gallup poll asked “What is your opinion of the F.B.I.?” 41 percent said “very high, excellent, it does wonderful job,” and 53 percent said “good, approve of it,” for a total of 94 percent. Three percent voiced “mild disapproval,” and the responses of 1 percent were “derogatory.”More recently, the NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll tracked partisan views of the F.B.I. from December 2014 to January 2018. Over that three-year period, the percentage of Democrats voicing “a great deal or quite a bit of confidence” in the agency rose from 34 to 53 percent.Republican confidence moved in the opposite direction, from 46 to 31 percent.Just this month, a February 1-2 Survey Monkey poll sponsored by Axios found that favorable views of the F.B.I. among Republicans — putatively members of the law-and-order party — had fallen to 38 percent, while a plurality, 47 percent, disapproved. Among all voters, 49 percent approved of the F.B.I. and 28 percent disapproved; Democrats were favorable by 64-14.Alex Theodoridis, a political scientist at the University of California-Merced, wrote me:Theodoridis argued that the damage to “any given institution is not likely to last beyond its usefulness in a specific political context.” But, he warned,Moving from politicization to politics, how likely are these trends to play out in the midterm elections?“A Democratic turnaround in 2018 is far from assured,” Robert Y. Shapiro, a political scientist at Columbia, emailed me:The recent volatility of the stock market poses dangers to Trump and the Republican Party generally. Still, Trump’s ratings, always unfavorable, have improved in recent weeks.In a setback for Democrats, the generic House vote in opinion surveys — “are you likely to vote for a Democrat or Republican for the House?” — has fallen from a 12.9 point Democratic advantage as recently as Dec. 30 to a 6-point Democratic advantage on Feb. 7. A rough rule of thumb is that Democrats will need at least a 10-point advantage on the generic vote to have a shot at retaking the House.In a report published just before Trump’s State of the Union address last week, Gallup reported significant improvements during Trump’s first year in office on voters’ outlook on the economy, the nation’s military preparedness, its policies to control crime and the danger posed by terrorism.Perhaps more significant, Gallup found that the percentage of adults saying “now is a good time to find a quality job” rose from 42 percent in 2016 to 58 percent in 2017, the highest it has been over the 17 years that Gallup has asked the question.And the most recent Quinnipiac Poll conducted February 2-5 should make Democratic strategists nervous. Trump has a negative 40-55 percent approval rating, but it’s “his best overall score in seven months.” Seventy percent of voters described the economy as excellent or good, the highest since 2001, and by a margin of 48 to 41 they credit Trump more than President Barack Obama.Howard Rosenthal, a political scientist at N.Y.U., brought the discussion down to less abstract levels by noting in an email that in politics, “what matters in the economy is real disposable income over the 6-12 months before an election.”If Rosenthal is right, then the future of democracy in America during the Trump administration depends as much or more on unemployment, take home pay, the Dow Jones industrial average, tax rates and the gross domestic product as on principled support for the rule of law.In all likelihood, as the investigation by the special counsel, Robert Mueller, continues to pursue lines of inquiry reaching deep into the White House, Trump will have plenty of opportunities in the near future to push the envelope on the rule of law.Stephen Ansolabehere, a political scientist at Harvard, described in an email the unique political position Trump has staked out. “His approval is almost 20 points lower than approval of most of his policy initiatives,” Ansolabehere noted:Looking forward toward the midterm elections, Ansolabehere is not optimistic about Democratic prospects to win back control of the House:That could all change, he added:A colleague of Ansolabehere’s in the Harvard government department, Jon Rogowski, suggested that Trump may pay a price for his highly controversial behavior. He wrote me that in research conducted with Andrew Reeves at Washington University in St. Louis:In other words, Rogowski wrote,At the same time, Rogowski added,The Rogowski and Reeves thesis faces a certain test. Trump won the Republican nomination and the presidency by conducting a campaign directly challenging the notion that the electorate will punish a politician for “violating accepted constitutional arrangements.”He has not wavered from this course throughout the first year of his presidency, and, barring unforeseen events, it will guide him into the 2020 election.If Republicans retain control of both branches of Congress in 2018 — even if by just one vote in the House and a 50-50 split (with Vice President Pence the tiebreaker) in the Senate — Trump will claim vindication. His assault on the pillars of democracy will continue unabated, with increasingly insidious effect.
