In the Trump era, Republicans have been revising their views on right and wrong.In 2011, the Public Religion Research Institute asked voters ifWhite evangelical Protestants were the least forgiving. Sixty-one percent said such a politician could not “behave ethically,” twice the 30 percent who felt that such a politician could manage it.Every other religious group was less judgmental. Catholics, 49 no, 42, yes; white mainline Protestants: 44 percent no, 38 percent yes; the religiously unaffiliated, 26 no, 63 yes.Are the moral convictions of white evangelical Protestants writ in stone? Apparently not.Five years later, in October, 2016, P.R.R.I. asked the same question. The percentage of white evangelical Protestants who said that a politician who commits an immoral act in their personal life could still behave ethically shot up from 30 to 72 percent. The percentage saying such a politician could not serve ethically plunged from 63 to 20 percent.“In a head-spinning reversal,” Robert P. Jones, the C.E.O. of P.R.R.I., wrote in the July 2017 issue of The Atlantic,What happened in the interim? The answer is obvious: the advent of Donald Trump.There is more to this phenomenon than evangelical hypocrisy. Many Republican voters, including self-identified strong conservatives, are ready and willing to shift to the left if they’re told that that’s the direction Trump is moving.Michael Barber and Jeremy C. Pope, political scientists at Brigham Young University, reported in their recent paper “Does Party Trump Ideology? Disentangling Party and Ideology in America,” that many Republican voters are:Those most willing to adjust their positions on ten issues ranging from abortion to guns to taxes are firm Republicans, Trump loyalists, self-identified conservatives and low information Republicans.The Barber-Pope study suggests that for many Republicans partisan identification is more a tribal affiliation than an ideological commitment.Many partisans are, in effect, more aligned with the leader of their party than with the principles of the party. (Although Barber and Pope confined their study to Republicans, they note that Democrats may “react in similar ways given the right set of circumstances.”)President Trump’s ability to slide his supporters to the left or right will face a major challenge if he lives up to what Democratic congressional leaders described on Wednesday night as the beginnings of an agreement to prevent the deportation of nearly 800,00 undocumented young immigrants and to strengthen border security without building a wall.Barber and Pope’s paper expands on recent work by David E. Broockman and Daniel M. Butler, “The Causal Effects of Elite Position-Taking on Voter Attitudes,” which was published in the American Journal of Political Science. Broockman and Butler, who are political scientists at the Stanford Graduate School of Business and the University of California-San Diego, found thatAlong similar lines, Christopher Achen and Larry Bartels, political scientists at Princeton and Vanderbilt, reject traditional views of democratic elections in their new book, “Democracy for Realists: Why Elections Do Not Produce Responsive Government.” Achen and Bartels argue that the “familiar ideal of thoughtful citizens steering the ship of state from the voting booth is fundamentally misguided.”Achen and Bartels dismiss this “folk theory of democracy” to argue that the more realistic view is thatThey conclude “that group and partisan loyalties, not policy preferences or ideologies, are fundamental in democratic politics.”The Barber-Pope study took advantage of Trump’s exceptional propensity during the campaign to take multiple, often contradictory stands on issues. This allowed them to cite two opposing stands Trump had taken on a series of issues in order to test the willingness of Republican voters to follow Trump’s position to the left or right.The authors conducted a survey with YouGov of 1,300 voters broken into five subgroups, each of which was asked 10 questions using a research design that employed “both ‘conservative’ and ‘liberal’ Trump cues.”For example:1. “Do you support or oppose increasing the minimum wage to over $10 an hour?”2. “Donald Trump has said that he supports this policy. How about you? Do you support or oppose increasing the minimum wage to over $10 an hour?”3. “Donald Trump has said that he opposes this policy. How about you? Do you support or oppose increasing the minimum wage to over $10 an hour?”4. “Congressional Republicans have said that they support this policy. How about you? Do you support or oppose increasing the minimum wage to over $10 an hour?”5. “Congressional Republicans have said that they oppose this policy. How about you? Do you support or oppose increasing the minimum wage to over $10 an hour?”The same variation was used on nine other contentious policy questions: increasing taxes on the wealthy, abortion, immigration, guns on school property, the Iran nuclear deal, universal health care, background checks for gun purchases, climate change and funding Planned Parenthood. The survey also asked respondents how much they approved of Trump, how they would describe their own ideology on a 5-point scale, and eight questions to rank their political knowledge.Barber and Pope found that people who identified themselves as strong Republicans were among the most malleable voters. When told Trump had adopted a liberal stance, these voters moved decisively to the left; when told Trump had taken a conservative position, they moved sharply to the right, as the accompanying chart shows.The same patterns emerged in the case of voters who strongly approve of Trump and among voters who describe themselves as “strong conservatives,” as I mentioned earlier. This last point suggests that instead of calling themselves strong conservatives, these voters are more accurately described as strong partisans.This, in turn, helps explain why most elected Republican officials accepted Trump’s equivocal response to the white supremacist marchers in Charlottesville, Va. last month.Nathaniel Persily, a professor of law and political science at Stanford, described his surprise at the docility of Republican officials in an email:Persily went on to argue a related point:The extraordinary approval ratings Trump gets from his core voters further reinforce the unwillingness of Republican elected officials to defy him. Among Republicans who voted for Trump in the primaries, his approval rating in a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll earlier this month stood at 98 percent. Among Republicans who did not vote for Trump in the primaries, his approval rating stood at 66 percent.I asked both Barber and Pope of Brigham Young what their thoughts on American politics are now that Trump has been in office eight months.Pope argued in an email that there has been too much emphasis on polarization and not enough on partisanship.While elites — elected officials and party activists — are ideologically polarized, the best the general public “can manage is a kind of tribal partisanship that does not really reflect the content of the elite discussion,” Pope wrote:Republican leaders in the House and Senate, in Pope’s view, are struggling to come to terms with a hard truth: that much of the Republican electorateIn a separate email, Barber wrote that the commonplace phrase “all politics is identity politics” is a good description “of the state of the Republican Party, and the Democratic Party to a degree.”He noted that a large corporate tax cut “isn’t really an ideological priority for much of the rank and file” of the Republican Party, but “if it means that their side has ‘won’, then they are in favor of it. More broadly, I think it shows us that teamsmanship is much more important than any particular policy agenda.”What can we take away from all of this?First, Trump’s base has given him considerable leeway and his strongest supporters are likely to back him when he violates Republican orthodoxy — as he did recently by agreeing to a debt ceiling strategy proposed by Democratic leaders over the objections of their Republican counterparts.Second, the claims of ideological conservatives that a large segment of the electorate has turned to the right on policy issues is suspect at best.Third, and most significant, if the Barber-Pope, Broockman-Daniels and Achen-Bartels conclusions are right, American politics is less a competition of ideas and more a struggle between two teams.In other words, insofar as elections have become primal struggles, and political competition has devolved into an atavistic spectacle, the prospect for a return to a politics of compromise and consensus approaches zero, no matter what temporary accommodations professional politicians make.
