To the Editor:Re “Trump Abandons Iran Pact He Long Scorned” (front page, May 9):The aftermath of President Trump’s announcement of his ill-advised withdrawal from the Iran nuclear deal is proving to be even more concerning than the lead-up to it.Our allies and many Americans are appropriately worried that, other than sanctions, there is no “Plan B” in the nuclear realm. This validates what is increasingly alarming — that we have at the helm a president whose singular mission is to disengage from the established international order, especially that which is associated with his predecessor.As with the Paris climate accord and trade agreements, President Trump no doubt has found it easy to disengage. What to do next requires a vision that he surely lacks.ROGER HIRSCHBERGBONDVILLE, VT.To the Editor:Re “Where’s That Better Deal?” (editorial, May 9):You write that President Trump is “reneging” on the Obama administration’s nuclear deal with Iran. What he has done is exercise his clear authority to disavow an agreement of a prior administration, which it acknowledged to be nonbinding, that he believes endangers national security interests.President Barack Obama knew that he had no hope of winning the two-thirds Senate vote required for ratification of a treaty; indeed, the agreement was opposed by bipartisan majorities in both houses of Congress. He therefore conveniently characterized the deal as an “executive agreement” that did not require congressional approval, even by a simple majority.There is accordingly no basis to claim that a new executive should not have reviewed an imprudent “executive agreement” made by his predecessor. And in view of the agreement’s failure to provide for “anytime, anywhere” inspections, its allowance of continued development of ballistic missiles, and the “sunset” provisions that begin voiding restrictions on Iran in 10 years, withdrawing from the agreement was clearly warranted.HOWARD F. JAECKEL, NEW YORKTo the Editor:President Trump’s decision to withdraw from the Iran nuclear accord will be hailed by American isolationists as a great, decisive move. That decision, coupled with similar withdrawals from the Paris climate accord and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, ensure that America’s leadership in the world is coming to an end. The rest of the international community will work around the United States, and the United States will have declining influence.When decisions are made against America’s interests as the rest of the world simply moves on, please don’t whine. Those decisions will be a natural consequence of the Fortress America policies now in place.STEPHEN LANDERSSTRATFORD, ONTARIOTo the Editor:Re “Deal’s Collapse Leaves Leader in Fragile State” (front page, May 9):One of the worst consequences of President Trump’s pulling the United States out of the Iran nuclear deal is that it strengthens the hard-line Iranian Revolutionary Guard and weakens the moderate government of Iran’s president, Hassan Rouhani. That will tilt Iranian politics to the right and will likely push Iran to take a hard-line position in opposition to American allies.That means that Iran will likely expand its military umbrella over parts of the Middle East, and that is exactly the opposite of what Mr. Trump says he is after, and it surely is not what Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, wants.JEFF WARNER, LOS ANGELESThe writer is the action coordinator for LA Jews for Peace.To the Editor:Re “A Courageous Trump Call on a Lousy Iran Deal” (column, nytimes.com, May 8):Bret Stephens tells us that the president made the right decision to abandon the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, assuming “serious thought has been given to what comes next.” Just what evidence, Mr. Stephens, do you have that President Trump has ever given serious thought to any public policy matter?STEPHEN POLIT, BELMONT, MASS.
