To the Editor:Re “U.S. to Consider Special Counsel in Uranium Deal” (front page, Nov. 14), about a possible investigation into donations to the Clinton Foundation:By seeking to weaponize the Justice Department to distract from the ongoing investigations into Russian election interference and the Trump campaign, President Trump now imitates the autocrats he so much admires: Presidents Vladimir Putin of Russia, Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey and Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines.A politically motivated investigation and prosecution would be yet another of Mr. Trump’s norm-breaking threats to American freedom and democracy. Too many in our country will cheer this further breach of our sacred tradition of a politically independent criminal justice system without even understanding what it portends for America. That’s the ignorance and shortsightedness that Mr. Trump preys upon.IRA BELSKY, FRANKLIN LAKES, N.J.To the Editor:Re “ ‘Lock Her Up’ Becomes More Than a Slogan” (news analysis, front page, Nov. 15):More than the “banana republic” politics of retribution are at play in President Trump’s demands for a special counsel to investigate Hillary Clinton’s supposed crimes. He is positively obsessed with the woman he beat in the last election. Like Raskolnikov in Dostoyevsky’s “Crime and Punishment,” he keeps circling around the scene of the crime — the 2016 presidential election — even though this is undoubtedly creating complications in the special prosecutor’s investigation of Russian interference.But Mr. Trump can’t help himself. It’s as if he has to keep proving to himself and the public at large just how guilty and undeserving of the high office Mrs. Clinton really is.JOEL BRENCE, LAKEWOOD, OHIOTo the Editor:Your Nov. 15 editorial “The Attorney General Doesn’t Recall” rightly emphasizes Jeff Sessions’s astonishing memory lapses. Equally unnerving (or duplicitous), though, are his evasions, prevarications, lack of legal knowledge and just plain stonewalling.Why should we have confidence in an attorney general who lies about or forgets key facts, refuses to describe conversations with the executive branch, and claims no knowledge about collusion, plans for presidential pardons or contacts with foreign agents? His Forrest Gump act is getting old.RICHARD ROTH, SEATTLETo the Editor:Which straw was the last? The playground taunts flung at Kim Jung-un, the nomination of a pharmaceutical executive to run the Health and Human Services Department or the use of the Justice Department for personal vengeance? It’s hard to say when my disbelief turned into despair, but the shift was completed in the past week.While the Trump presidency may well hurtle us into nuclear war, it has already pummeled the nation’s soul. This is not about policy or politics. It’s about civility and dignity, about endless lying, name-calling and abuse. It was unbelievable at first. But now, as we see that the assaults continue, that the president will not grow up and that Congress will not speak out — indeed, some members are following his awful lead — we are left feeling … gutted.Take away our health care. Give tax cuts to the richest of the rich. But, please, members of Congress, stand against deceit and show us that this country still believes in what is righteous and decent. In the end, the loss of our nation’s honor may be the most damaging legacy of this president, and all who remain silent at his side.GIGI MORRIS, SAG HARBOR, N.Y.
