Second Stage Theater’s 2018-19 Off Broadway offerings will include a world premiere by the Tony Award-winning book writer of “Dear Evan Hansen” and a new musical by the composer of “Next to Normal.”Steven Levenson’s 1969-set “Days of Rage,” about a group of radicals in upstate New York whose lives are disrupted by the arrival of two strangers, will begin previews Oct. 2 at the Tony Kiser Theater. Trip Cullman, who directed “Lobby Hero,” the inaugural show for Second Stage’s new Broadway home, will direct.Along with “Dear Evan Hansen,” Mr. Levenson is a television writer and playwright whose works include “If I Forget” and “The Language of Trees.”“Superhero,” a new musical by the Tony winner John Logan and the composer Tom Kitt, will begin previews Jan. 31. The show will include “a fractured family, the mysterious stranger in apartment 4-B, and the unexpected hero who just might save the day,” according to the theater’s announcement. The Tony nominees Kate Baldwin and Bryce Pinkham have signed on to star.Mr. Logan, who won his Tony for the 2010 play “Red,” is also a prolific screenwriter of such blockbusters as “Gladiator” and “Skyfall.” Mr. Kitt, collaborating with Brian Yorkey, created “Next to Normal,” a surprise hit about a bipolar mother and her family, which had a run at Second Stage and later transferred to Broadway. The creators won a Pulitzer Prize in drama for the show in 2010.For Second Stage’s third Off Broadway show, Lila Neugebauer will lead a new production of Christopher Shinn’s “Dying City,” a play set in a New York apartment that explores the human dimension of global politics. Previews are slated to begin in July 2019. A fourth production will be announced at a later date.Second Stage’s next Broadway venture, Young Jean Lee’s “Straight White Men,” starring Armie Hammer, Josh Charles, the performance artist and playwright Kate Bornstein and others, is set to begin performances June 29. It marks the first play by an Asian-American woman to be staged on Broadway. Following that in the fall, Second Stage’s revival of Harvey Fierstein’s “Torch Song,” directed by Moisés Kaufman, will transfer to Broadway.Asked about the lack of Broadway programming past “Torch Song,” Carole Rothman, the theater’s artistic director, said, “My hope is that the play runs for the year.”
